
0:00
Thanks very much for inviting me to MobileFest.
Today i am going to try and say a few words about some of the mobility ideas originally came from, how they affect children and maybe a little bit about how the future is going to turn out.

What I would like to do is first to look at perhaps the most important mobile tech. to ever been invented. And we can think of this tech. as wanting to encompass the entire organization of human knowledge. We want it
to be solid state and mobile of course. We want extremely hi-res and high contract, ambient lightnenig 
display to be used anywhere in the world. Really easy to use basic interface from getting from one place to another in it. It's got to have a wide range of the kinds of knowledge it can hold. It needs have unlimited battery life. And we want it to be bio-degradable so it won't pollute the planet.

And of course what I'm talking about here is basica organization of knowledge which is called, "The Book". So this tech. has already been invented. It has change basic human civilization in many ways.

1:26
And is very difficult to do better than the book using computer tech. today. We can do some of the things the book can do, better. We can do some of the things a book can do, more cheaply.
But, it is hard to do everything that a book can do.

1:45
So it's a good thing to think about as we compare what are new technologies are going to do.

When the book was invented people thought about the future of printing.
About the best they can think of, in the 19th century when the Industrial Revolution came in,
that they will be able to go from a hand wheeled printing press to something run by steam
and then by electricity to really make inexpensive books and lots of different kinds of books.

2:20
But, in fact what has actually happened to the
surprise of most publishers and most makers of printing presses is electronic technologies
came along and completely changed the dynamics so we didn't have something
that is a slightly cheaper version of a big electrically or steam-driven web printing.
But, what we have is something that people can carry around with them and do printing
on their desktops and so the future here was quite unexpected.
And in many ways still is. Many publishers are still grappling with something that they
were told was going to happen 30 years ago but they didn't believe it.

3:04
Much of the same as happened with content so the Catholic Church does not try to stamp out
the printing press in the 15th century because it was being used to print Bibles and that
seemed to be okay.
But, within 50 years printers started making much smaller books that people can carry around.
Much less expensive books.
And these books we're not about religious subjects but about ideas of all kinds.
Many from the Greeks and the Romans.

3:45
And about a hundred years later the huge change in thought from the Bible 
happened with Galileo and then with Newton.
And a 100 years after than we had huge changes in the way governments and social organization
was thought of.

3:58
So whatever people thought the printing press was in the mid-fifteenth century
it turned out to be something completely different.
And most of us today think this was a good thing. I think it's a good thing.
But, it certainly changed almost everything about the way the 15th century thought and did things.

4:22
And McLuhan pointed out something really important which most of us did not pay attention to
and don't think about. He said, "We shape our tools and then they reshape us."
And [Henry David] Thoreau said a kind of a more pessimistic version of this much earlier than
McLuhan. He says, "We become the tools of our tools."
So once we make technologies we windup starting to serve them in various ways.

4:50
So I can think of McLuhan's way of looking at it as optimistic
and Thoreau's way of looking at it as as pessimistic.

And Thoreau had an interesting comment about networks also.
When the first Atlantic telegraph cable went in, about 1865 or so,
they asked him what he thought about it. He said he thought he would be afraid that he
might find out that some European princess had just gotten a new hat.
So he correctly anticipated the inability of people to use technologies seriously.
But, in fact they would use it for all sorts of general human concerns
and there would be a real tendency towards triviality.
And that certainly happened today.

5:40
And for me I started off in math and science.
I was a math major and molecular biology major in the mid-60s.
Around 1966 I saw the first real computer graphics program
Ivan Sutherland had done a few years before called, Sketchpad.
It was a completely different use of computers that I was used to.
I was used to programming big mainframes and here was a system that was done on a
big mainframe but basically what was interesting was a 10 inch by 10 inch display 
on which you can draw things. You could give them behaviours, sometimes mathematical
behaviours. This system would stimulate them dynamically so this is a completely
different way of looking at computing. My reaction to this was to think of this
as if you extended it you could do all computing that way.
So I came up with this idea of dynamic objects.

6:41
Next thing I saw was Engelbart's vision of personal computing,
which was not unlike what we have today.
This picture was taken in 1966. There he is with the mouse he invented.
He's on a black and white display. He's dealing with hyperlinked documents.
He's collaborating with people up in Oregon from California.
So he's doing something that is like the web, maybe a little bit superior to it, about 40 years ago.

7:14
The idea I got from that was, "Boy, this is hard to do on time sharing. So maybe we should do it on a desktop computer."
So this wasn't the first personal computer, but it was a pretty modern looking one.
It had a pointing device, multiple windowed screen, and so forth.
Because this Flex machine that Ed Cheadle and I did were was aimed at non-computer professionals
I started visiting people who have been working with non-computer professionals.
The most interesting person I found was Seymour Papert who been working with children.

7:53
Papert was a mathematician like I was. He started doing some really profound things with kids.
Not just having them make pictures on the screen, but actually thinking about these pictures
in a mathematical way, using an advanced form of mathematics called, Differential Geometry,
that was actually paradoxically much easier for children to understand.

8:20
So Seymour would take a young child and get them to close their eyes and walk in a circle with
their body and ask them what they were doing. They would say, "Well, I'm going a little and turning
a little, over and over."
In LOGO, going a little forward and turning a little is "TURN 5"
and over and over again is "REPEAT". And so if you tell a Turtle to do this, then the Turtle
would make a perfect circle.
It doesn't need Cartesian coordinates. It doesn't even need a center because the circle
is that geometric figure that has constant curvature.

8:58
So I thought this is the best idea that anybody ever had for computing.
Which is, "Here is an area where it actually went beyond the book to be able to embody
a special kind of powerful mathematics in a way that very young children could learn it."
So I got very excited about that.

9:18
And my reaction to this was to draw a cartoon on the plane home that showed a couple
of kids sitting out in the middle of a grass field having just programmed their own game
of Space War and learned about "f = m a" and other parts of physics.
Their little DynaBooks here are communicating with each other with wireless communication.
The research community I was embedded in at that time, the ARPA Research Community, had
been working on the ARPAnet. I had also started on a wireless version and so I have this notion
that finally there is a real reason for thinking ahead, that there would be machines like this
DynaBook and we can make them inexpensively enough for children.
We could try a lot of Seymour Papert's ideas on them.

10:19
Then right after that this idea and a bunch of others from other people got concentrated
at Xerox Parc.
Here's a cardboard model I made of the that cartoon idea and we decided to build a desktop computer
again but one that was kind of like what the DynaBook was going to be.
We invented much of the modern technology that you used today.

10:49
So we had object-oriented programming, dynamic animation, the windows user interface,
desktop publishing, the ethernet, the laser printer. We invented part of The Internet and so forth.
So there's a whole suite of technologies here.

11:07
Looking ahead to just a few years ahead that set of inventions done at XEROX PARC
was done by only two dozen people. The reason two dozen people were able to do all that
is the technology had changed from discrete transistors to integrated circuits that had
enough components on them so that relatively small numbers of people can build computers all by themselves.

11:34
The next revolution along these lines is happening now and is just starting to be seen
in the in the marketplace. But, by about 10 years from now not just displays will be made out of
conductive plastics, but actually the Entire Computer and these conductive plastic some of them
can be made by something like an inkjet printer sitting right on your desk.

12:03
So you imagine now a high school student or college student or computer scientist
or somebody anywhere in the world who gets an idea for a computer, both hardware and software,
and can make the entire thing just on their desktop.

12:20
This is going to be an absolute revolution in both the cost of what it takes to make computers
but also who will be able to make them. So if we think about what is behind all this it's as
Mick Jagger would say, "It's only Math. and Science."

12:43
So essentially what's happening here is instead of requiring 200,000 people to make an Egyptian pyramid
out of old material what we basically need are 5 to 15 people who really know how to deal with the both
the physical and informational universe and that is sufficient to allow entirely new inventions to be
made and spread around.

13:12
So if we look at these three slides together and think about the Third World
or the non-developed world what this says is that the development in the non-developed world
can primarily take place through education by learning new points of view and
new ways of using the points of view. That the the need for huge steel mills
or a billion-dollar integrated circuit factories to make computers or in the realm of biology
of rather large installations to make fermentations of various kinds of bacteria and stuff,
this is going to change to something that's more like a kitchen science and the key to it is
going to be the points of view and the kinds of knowledge that people can exert.

14:09
So what we're talking about here is an education revolution.
Now most people in the regular world prize IQ.
So Leonardo is very justly celebrated for having a high IQ.
But, we have to ask what it would be like if you were born with an IQ of 500,
but in 10,000 BC. How far would you get?
How far did Leonardo get with his huge IQ, borned when he was born?
He designed many, many machines, but he couldn't invent a single-engine
for any of them that would make them work. He was just born in the wrong time and his IQ
wasn't strong enough to surmount the general knowledge of the time.
So knowledge tends to trump IQ and always has, but basically there's so much different kinds
of knowledge. People have had knowledge of different kinds for hundreds of thousands of years.
And so it's not so much the knowledge that is important, but the outlook.

15:19
I'm going to come back to this because the outlook that we have about what we
think knowledge is, how we think we can get it, how we trust the knowledge,
and how we distrust the knowledge, how we teach the knowledge,
and so forth, is actually the key to making progress here.

15:39
In the last couple of years we've seen the start of real computers for children.
Thanks primarily to Nicholas Negroponte who was the spearhead behind the one laptop per child XO (OLPC XO).
This kind of got companies first to be against the idea, but then to develop versions of their own.
Like the Intel Classmate here and there are others appearing on the scene now that Nicholas
has a topic of conversation and gotten other people to realize that children are a huge potential market
and a huge untapped resource for making the world better.

16:27
Companies like Nokia, who make a million phones a day, more than 400 million phones a year,
are another example of a another technology that is actually going to kind of converge with
inexpensive communications technologies with displays with enough pixels to allow thoughts
about education to seriously be thought about in the next several years.

16:56
So this is something that's happening right now.
The OLPC  has just started their first real mass build a couple of days ago.
And I'm sure that there are some talks about the OLPC at your conference.

17:12
When we look at this idea of children's computers and look at what is easy and what's hard,
the easiest thing is actually to make the computer itself.

17:25
Even though it's kind of a monumental task over the last few years it was still done by a few dozen
people and perhaps a hundred people at Quantum, the company that's making it.

17:39
So it's not that difficult to do technology today.
The system software and so forth is also a fair amount of work, but it's definitely doable
 and where things start to get harder here is in thinking about the environments for the children
 and really harder to start thinking about how we can teach children non-trivial ideas.

18:03
And they got almost intractable when we start asking questions,
"But, who is going to help the child learn these things?
 Where is the mentor?
 Where are the teachers? Where are the informed parents?"

18:15
And this question right now is somewhat unanswerable in the 1st and 2nd world.
In the developed world we don't have enough elementary school teachers who understand
 real math and real science.
 And we certainly don't have enough well and foreign teachers in the developing world.

18:34
So I believe this is actually the the problem that is going to have to be solved 
in order for all the rest of the stuff to make sense.
 And of course most of the attention so far is being directed at the easy parts
 of the problem and the most physical parts of the problem and and so forth.

18:52
The more invisible parts of the problem are just starting to surface now that
 these machines are starting to show up in various countries and people are wondering,
 "What can we do with them?"

19:05
So we take a look again at the difference between IQ, knowledge, and the outlook of it,
one of the big changes in history was kind of the outlook from thinking of most causes and effects
that are important, as having a kind of a spiritual or a magical background.

19:31
Actually, our human brains are very set up by nature to assign superstitious spiritual and magical causes
to things so most of humanity for most of the time we've been on the planet
has had various theories about the world that are kind of propelled by angels if you will.

19:56
And the Greeks started a revolution in thinking by trying to connect thoughts
to get together in a kind of a way that's kind of like articulating gears
so when your turn one gear it actually causes a lot of other things to happen.
In Greek mathematics it's very much like that.

20:18
But, of course there's more to a revolution in thought then just going to gears.
Part of the problem is that gear-like thinking applied to common sense views of the world
is still not very powerful. It gives us engineering for example, but it doesn't give us science.

20:40
And so an interesting example here are the shapes of these two tabletops is exactly the same.
This was made up by Roger Shepherd.
We can't see that they're the same.
So these have been used in drawing classes and so forth, but we can prove that they're
the same by actually picking up one of the table tops here and...

21:17
[PAUSE. Alan takes some time to find the control cues. Probably because it's a Windows XP machine
and he is used to Macs by Apple. He re-starts explaining the slide with two tabletops again.]

22:21
But, of course there's more to a revolution in thinking then just creating gear-like
causes and effects. Gear-like causes and effects gives us engineering,
but it doesn't give us science. So we have to deal with what's wrong with our
brains in order to get the science. A good example of this is to think about the assertion
that the shape and sizes of these tabletops is exactly the same.

22:54
But, we can't see it. This one looks long and skinny.
This one looks fat. But, we can kind of prove it by picking up one of the table tops here
and you can rotate this guy around. If I do it just carefully you can see it just fits nicely
here. In fact I originally got this table talk from over here and rotated it and put it over there.

23:19
So this is an interesting problem here: That we actually are fooled in a way that we
cannot see even after it's proven that we were fooled.
I have done this hundreds of times and I still see this as long and skinny and this is short and fat.

23:39
Another thing about our brain is as it's basically about dealing with now and simple changes, and now and simple extrapolations.

23:53
So almost everything we think about when there's a change,
it has this simple incremental way of thinking about it, but usually we're actually embedded
in something like this particular in the last few hundred years and particularly in the last 50 years.

24:10
And we just can't see this guy without something special. Just as an artist would have to
measure those tabletops in order to draw them accurately, we have to do measurements and use
mathematics in order to be able to see something that looks like this is actually one of these guys.

24:30
And far too many politicians, both past, present, and I'm afraid in the future,
are going to be fooled by this.

24:39
So again our common sense is to aggregate things.
So when we think about what can we make from bricks,
the simple way of aggregating bricks is in a pile or in a kind of a stack.

24:57
If we make big aggregates that way, we get Egyptian pyramids or big walls.

25:03
But what we don't get,
and what some of the smarter civilizations in history like the Greeks didn't get,
is non-obvious combinations of these bricks.

25:12
Partly because the powerful idea that there could be non-obvious things hadn't really surfaced yet.

25:19
So here's a non-obvious way of dealing with bricks, and you can sort of see why it's difficult to invent
the notion of an arch.

25:29
'Cause in order to make an arch you actually have to make a lot more than is here when you get done.

25:33
There's a whole scaffolding that goes in. The bricks are laid on top of it.
You drop the keystone in. You put some more bricks around this wall and then you subtract out the
scaffolding and everything stays up.

25:45
And it's both light and powerful. So you can make very big structures, structures the size of the Pyramids
from about a millionth the amount of material by having one of these architectural ideas.

25:59
And much of modern thinking is actually a shift from simple aggregations of things to new kinds
of architectures.

26:07
Anthropologists have studied human beings for maybe a 150 years now.
One of the things that they found are that all human groups,
maybe they've looked at three or four thousand human groups,
have a set of traits that is the same from group to group.

26:27
So every group has gotten good at coping.

26:30
That's why they still around.

26:32
They cope partly through cultural knowledge.

26:35
They're social. They have a language a culture.

26:39
They have fantasies. They tell stories.

26:41
They have tools, art, technologies, and so forth.

26:45
A whole bunch of things over here that are common.

26:47
 Every culture has a somewhat different...

26:52
Actual cultures have different somewhat different actual religions.
They have different actual stories.

26:57
But, the general traits here are the same 
from human being to human being.

27:04
So once you lay out these human universals
it's interesting to look into various
cultures around the world for things
that are universal.

27:14
And you find things like this for instance, the notion of
progress is modern.

27:19
It's not a not an old idea at all because the old days you
were just trying to survive.

27:24
You weren't trying to progress at all and almost all
of the strategies in traditional
cultures are for for coping rather than
progressing.

27:34
Most people have lived and died on the earth without ever learning
to read and write.

27:39
Without having a deductive, abstract mathematics,
model-based science, and so forth.

27:44
Equal rights is an invention.

27:47
There's no traditional culture that anthropologists
have ever found that has this idea,
particularly for women.

27:53
And so you get
these rare ideas over here that are
almost certainly human inventions.

28:00
And if you think about it much of civilization
depends on learning these things [points to "Progress" column list on slide]
rather than these [points to "Coping" column list on slide]
and much of modern education
is about trying to teach these things [points to "Progress" column list on slide].

28:10
Because they're generally more difficult
to learn and they're more difficult to
teach because they're less natural than
these human universals.

28:20
So a lot of what we should be thinking about when we're
trying to deal with education and make
positive changes in education is, "How can
we do this stuff better?"

28:30
"How can we find more of these guys better?"

28:35
So another McLuhan idea here is what I
really like he says, "Don't worry about
whether it's right or wrong, just try to
find out what is going on."

28:48
What he might mean here is that right or wrong
we think of as absolutes but they're
always relative to our belief structures.

28:56
If there's one thing that we've
learned over the last four or five
hundred years is that things we believe
a few hundred years ago have turned out
not to be so.

29:06
Many of the most disastrous things we've done over the
last few hundred to a few thousand years
have been because of incorrect beliefs.

29:14
So science is a way of trying to get
around our tendency to believe in thing
and trying to find out what's going on.

29:21
So this is great general advice from
Marshall McLuhan...

29:31
And in the wonderful OLPC EXO
to do things that are like LOGO like
Mitchel Resnick Star logo and like the
29:41
small talk stuff that we did it's dark
29:43
spark long time ago

29:48
So as an example we can write a little script here the
script says, "I'm going to set the cars
speed to 40 each time" and "I'm going to
change the cars left/right position each
time by the cars speed".

30:03
So if I tell it to do it I'm going to drop a dot down
and these dots are 40 units apart and so
we can see that if I were to make this
thing run by itself I get a uniform
velocity there and I have a visual
pattern with those dots of what a
uniform velocity is...

30:35
Which is equal distances traversed in each ticket of
time there I can try something else.

30:41
I can try say okay instead of that I'm
going to increase by 30 each time

30:51
If I run the program I got something like
this the car takes off very very quickly,

30:56
and even though I can see what's going
on here that each one of these is 30
longer than the other it's also
sometimes helps to do a little
measurement

31:06
So one way to measure is by taking a little taking a
little rectangle here and making it run
from the beginning of one of these guys
let's make it run from the end the end
of one of these guys to the end of the
of the next one here kind of like that.

31:32
And for each one of these things I have
to have a slightly larger rectangle so I
got something that's kind of like this.

31:45
Now if I stack these guys up here kind
of like... yes...

31:59
I can see here that the that the excess
between these guys is... okay... oops.

32:41
Okay. So now if I stack them up and do it
carefully enough what happens when you
get old it's hard to see.

33:06
It's something like this
and actually I'm going to do this one
again. This is too messy. Yeah

33:38
Okay. So I'll transition into this one
again. So we can actually experience some of
these ideas by using our XO.

33:57
I'm using. The E-toys software that lens on the XO
here to have this little car here that
is gonna be driven by this little script
here.

34:12
So the speed is always going to be
30 and I'm going to increase the car's
position by third by the car speed each
time.

34:23
So if I let it run here I get a
trail of dots because the speed is
constant.

34:30
And the dots are 30 apart so if
I change the speed each time for
instance if I say let's increase the
speed by 30 each time and let the car
run what does it look like the car just
takes off and I get this pattern that
shows that in this you know time we went...

34:53
this far in this unit time we went that
far plus 30 and this time we went that
far plus 30 and so forth.

34:59
So I get a kind
of a visual pattern of what the
accelerated speed looks like and if I do
that with some children a couple of
months before a physical experiment we
can get some interesting results.

35:18
So here's a a bunch of fifth graders and
the objects that you think will fall to
the earth at the same time like this.

35:33
Okay. Not pay any attention to what
anybody else
dropping the same speed.

36:29
Galileo kid here. It was a little girl
who jumped to the same conclusion that
Galileo did 400 years ago which is well...

36:39
What we should do is actually just
try dropping a heavy one in the light
one and we can hear whether they hit the
ground at the same time or not.

36:48
So obviously Aristotle did not ask a child
and Saint Thomas Aquinas did not ask a
child either because he believed what
Aristotle said.

37:00
So perhaps Galileo was the first adult in history to be
able to think like children can think

37:05
Kind of an interesting common theory
then we can look at this closer by
taking a movie.

37:15
So here's a movie of the ball dropping and we can see what when
it's when it's dropping continuously
it's hard to see what's going on.

37:21
Even when we even when we single step it
it's hard to see what's going on but if
we look at every fifth frame here we can
see a little bit more what's going on.

37:37
If we stack up those fifth every
fifth frames we can see a pattern here...

37:42
that when the children see that they say,
"Oh! Acceleration." So the question is,

37:58
"How to measure the acceleration?"

38:01
And what they do here is by measuring from
the bottom of one ball on this frame to
the bottom of the ball here are
measuring from the bottom here to here

38:12
So they get something like this and
if they stack these these up carefully,

38:29
this gets harder and they get older the
stack these up like this then they say,

38:37
"Oh, the XS from here to here is this
strip and the XS from the yellow on to
the next one is this and the XS from
next one to this one and that's constant."

38:49
So this pattern is a pattern of
constant acceleration.

38:54
Let's listen to how Tyrone actually did this.

39:00
"...to be sure that I was doing it just right I got a
magnifier which would help me figure out
if the size was just right. After I'd
done that I would go and click on the
little basic category buddy...

39:18
...and then a little mini would pop up and one of the
categories would be geometry so I click on that.

39:25
And here it has many things that
have to do with the size and shape of
the rectangle so I would see what
the height is and I kept going along the process
until I had them all lined up with their
height.

39:42
I subtracted the smaller one's
height from the big one to see if there
was a kind of pattern
anywhere that could help me.

39:50
And my guess weren't... so in order to show that it
was working I decided to leave a dot copy so it
would show if the ball was going the exact right
speed and acceleration."

40:01
[Alan starts speaking again] This is
pretty cool. He decides to drop a dot
from his simulated ball and shows that
it matches up with the stacked frames here.

40:13
Another way to to do this is to run
a movie and the animation at the
same time.

40:27
So, by the way, 70% percent
of college students fail to understand
Galileo and gravity.

40:33
But, most fifth graders that we've worked with using
this way of doing it, this kind of
mathematics and this kind of approach,
and doing their own simulations on the
OLPC machine, are able to understand it
much much better than most college
students.

40:50
So a payoff here is this
little gravity script that they come up
with can be used to make things move the
way gravity makes things move on things
more interesting than balls, like a
spaceship.

41:06
So they start that script
running on the spaceship, it will be
drawn down to the surface of the moon,
and will crash, but we can add a motor
here so we can think of...

41:23
gravity is a velocity eater and the motor is a
velocity producer.

41:27
You have a little script here to show a flame from the
rocket ship when the motor is on.

41:33
And this little script decides whether
there's a crash or not if the ship is
going too fast when it hits.

41:41
So if I start the game and grab on to the
joystick here, you see I can
oppose gravity here and land it
carefully and not get a crash this time.

41:55
This is a game people used to pay money
with.

41:58
So another way of thinking about
things is that simple cause-and-effect
relationships, like gears, don't scale
very well.

42:05
So you can build a clock,
perhaps out of a thousand gears, but then
it gets really complicated to build more
complicated things out of gears,

42:13
And simple connections of wires
between things starts getting really
complicated.

42:18
[Shows slide of a room with many wires connected to various devices.]
This is an actual room, I
won't say where, and there's a sign here
that says, "Do not touch any of these
wires." 

42:28
So the research group I was part
of, the ARPA/PARC research group, realized
that you can replace any mess like this
with a simple message sending Network
like an Ethernet or an Internet.

42:41
And all things large and small that have to be
connected together can be connected in a
very simple way.

42:48
This simple way is actually a looser coupling way than
tightly tying wires together.

42:53
This is another outlook that we have to think about.

42:58
So here's a really simple example of using the gravity thing we just
discovered.

43:05
So the gravity is working on
that green line, you can think
of it as being a lid on top of these
atoms. The atoms are being moved around
because they're hot.

43:24
Temperature is motion
and they're exchanging momentum with the
green lid.

43:30
And so they're keeping that lid up.

43:33
And we have a thousand of these
going so this is a using a version of
Mitchel Resnick's Star LOGO that we
made in Squeak.

43:44
So if I turn that turtle count into 500 here,
the weight of this lid is being pushed upwards by half the
number molecules.

44:03
And so what happens is we have
a pressure decrease that lowers this
thing about halfway down.

44:09
You can see this.

44:21
If I put in say, 2000, here I get an explosion
and some nice shockwaves.

44:34
But, eventually it
settles into an equilibrium that's
about twice what it was with a thousand.

44:39
So you can see some simulations here of
Boyle's law done with this very nice
simple computer simulation that children
can easily make up to understand how
aggregates of lots of things actually
work together.

44:59
This extends our notion of outlook.

45:00
So the outlook of Newtonian
physics, and so much of the 18th
century, and some of 19th century physics,
and a lot of the ways we teach
mathematics and science today, is kind of
this very tightly bound cause-and-effect
relationship but the latter part of the
20th century in many many ways has
gotten much more biological.

45:29
So we can think of this as a transition from gears
to biology and this transition is not
just in the world of molecular biology,
but also the Internet is made this way...

45:41
and object-oriented programming is made
this way it's kind of a no centers
distributed loose coupling way
modeling things and so this way of
thinking about things is the probably
the most comprehensive most powerful way
we have of thinking about complexity today.

46:03
So it's natural to try and
think as hard as possible about how we
might help children learn this and one
of the ways of doing this is by having
them make ever more complex models on
the computer and to see the unintended
emerging properties that come from
dealing with many objects loosely
coupling working together.

46:36
So we've all heard about the blind men and the
elephant trying to figure out what it is
and if there's an elephant in education
modern education today that element is
mathematics.

46:51
The last couple of years I've been traveling around talking to
teachers at various levels in the United States.

46:57
And in the United States at least
if there's a a common denominator to why
things aren't happening in both math and
science it's basically at the root is
that the adults who teach children
generally lacked Salou insane
mathematical thinking.

47:20
And I don't mean knowledge of mathematics. Some adults
have some knowledge of mathematics that
the v8 the ability to think heuristic
alee to be able to represent things that
haven't been represented before to think
about relationships between them and all
of the things that are kind of the
background knowledge and skills of
mathematics and of modern science are
pretty much lacking for most of the K
through 12 teachers that I've talked to
mathematical heuristic thinking or
problem-solving heuristic thinking
or looking at things from multiple
points of view heuristic thinking is one
of the biggest problems that we have to
face in in the future at least in the
United States another problem
again in the United States


48:11
But, I think affecting everywhere is this idea of
"amusing ourselves to death". My friend,
Neil Postman, wrote a great book about it.

48:19
If we were to write that book today I
think he would entitle it distracting
ourselves to death because one of the
ways we're using electronic media is to
make an enormous amount of different
kinds of experiences that attract our
cave-person brains in a way.

48:45
Many of these experiences are keyed into these
human universals of things that we want
to do we want to communicate with other
people we want to go to the theater we
want to tell stories and so forth.

48:56
And now we've been able to multiply that
with the power of the Industrial
Revolution and it's produced an
incredible set of distractors.

49:06
For instance, there is now a television show
in the United States that is a contest
for people playing air guitar with the
game, "Guitar Hero", so this has gone from
being a fantasy game to something that
is now an actual pursuit by people who
are very, very far from learning anything
about actually playing a playing guitar.

49:31
So this is a real disaster and a nice
quote here is the bull wears itself out
on the Cape and fails to see the sword.

49:40
So if we're going to make big changes in
education we have to somehow get aware
of the Cape and concentrate more on
what's important with our limited amount
of time and our limited ability to use
our brains and finally maybe one of the
biggest trans Ising happening today again

50:03
because of electronic media and because
of a everybody becoming aware of
everybody else is this thing that goes

50:14
to the root of what it means to be a
human being and especially a human being
50:21
in a traditional society as it's for
50:24
most people they're trying to live their
50:27
life in the present and the meaning of
50:32
life is too abstract for them you could
50:36
think about a lot of what our impulses
50:40
towards civilization have been since the
50:43
Greeks and particularly in the last few
50:45
hundred years as trying to go from just
50:48
experiencing being alive which everybody
50:51
has for the last 200 years they're
50:54
trying to get more of a handle on what
50:56
the meaning of life could be I think we
50:58
know enough today to realize that the
51:01
meaning of life is something that we can
51:02
make up it's part and parcel of what it
51:05
means for example to say that people
51:10
should have equal rights and to try and
51:12
teach children to believe in equal
51:14
rights and to try to act as though equal
51:18
rights are something that is naturally
51:22
in the world rather than something
51:24
made up so I think this change from
51:27
naturalistic living to a more artificial
51:32
but perhaps richer perhaps nicer perhaps
51:39
more productive perhaps more progressive
51:42
form of living is the kind of thing I at
51:46
least would like to strive for

51:47
I hope everybody else who is interested in
helping children learn powerful ideas
will get interested in also.

51:56
So thank you very much
again I'm sorry not to be there but I
was glad to make this video for you and...

52:02
I hope it helps you think about what it
means to have a personal computer for
every child and on the planet. Thank you.
